Treatment for Breast Cancer - NCI Skip to main content An official website of the United States government Menu Search Search About Cancer Cancer Types Research Grants & Training News & Events About NCI Home Cancer Types Breast Cancer Breast Cancer Treatment Print Email Breast Cancer What is Breast Cancer? Types of Breast Cancer Causes & Risk Factors Symptoms Screening Diagnosis Stages Treatment Surgery Radiation Chemotherapy Hormone Therapy Immunotherapy Targeted Therapy Treatment by Stage Inflammatory Breast Cancer Treatment Triple-Negative Breast Cancer Treatment Survival Rates & Prognosis Survivorship & Living with Breast Cancer Breast Cancer During Pregnancy Breast Lumps in Children Breast Cancer in Men Health Professional Research Advances Breast Cancer Treatment Different types of treatment are available for breast cancer. You and your cancer care team will work together to decide your treatment plan, which may include more than one type of treatment. Your treatment options may include both local and systemic treatments. Local treatments , such as surgery and radiation, are directed at the area with cancer and not the whole body. Systemic treatments , such as chemotherapy, are drugs that can reach cancer cells throughout the body.  There are different treatment approaches for each type and stage of breast cancer. To learn more about treatment for specific types and stages of breast cancer, review What kind of treatment will I receive? below. Consulte Tratamiento del cáncer de mama (seno) para obtener información sobre el tratamiento del cáncer de mama en español. Join a Clinical Trial Joining a clinical trial may be an option. There are different types of clinical trials for people with breast cancer. You can use the clinical trial search to find NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are accepting participants.  You can also review a list of all current NCI-supported Breast Cancer Clinical Trials . For help finding a clinical trial, contact NCI’s Cancer Information Service . Local treatments Surgery for Breast Cancer Learn about surgery to treat breast cancer and access more information about lumpectomy and mastectomy, the two main types of surgery used. Radiation for Breast Cancer You may receive radiation therapy as part of your breast cancer treatment. Learn about the types of radiation therapy and possible side effects. Systemic treatments Chemotherapy for Breast Cancer Not everyone with breast cancer will get chemotherapy. Learn about who gets chemo and why and find a list of drugs that may be prescribed. Hormone Therapy for Breast Cancer Hormone therapy helps lower the risk of recurrence of certain types of breast cancer. Learn about types of hormone therapy, common side effects, and more. Immunotherapy for Breast Cancer Immunotherapy may be used to treat triple-negative breast cancer. Learn about immunotherapy, when it is given, and common side effects. Targeted Therapy for Breast Cancer Targeted therapy is a treatment for certain types of breast cancer. Learn about types of targeted therapy, common side effects, and more. What kind of treatment will I receive? Breast Cancer Treatment by Stage The stage of breast cancer is an important factor in determining which type of treatment may work best for you. Learn more about treatment options for breast cancer by stage. Breast Cancer During Pregnancy Learn about breast cancer during pregnancy, including challenges in detection and options for treatment in women who are pregnant or breastfeeding. Ductal Carcinoma in Situ (DCIS) DCIS is diagnosed when abnormal cells are found in the milk ducts of the breast. Learn more about DCIS, including treatment options and prognosis. Inflammatory Breast Cancer Treatment Inflammatory breast cancer treatments may include surgery, radiation therapy, chemotherapy, and more. Learn about the different ways inflammatory breast cancer can be treated. Triple-Negative Breast Cancer Treatment Triple-negative breast cancer treatments may include surgery, chemotherapy, and more. Learn about the different ways triple-negative breast cancer can be treated. Paget Disease of the Breast Paget disease of the breast involves the nipple and areola. Learn about symptoms, diagnosis, and treatment of this rare type of breast cancer. Print Email Back To Top About About This Website en Español Reuse & Copyright Social Media Resources Contact Us Publications Dictionary of Cancer Terms Find a Clinical Trial Policies Accessibility FOIA Privacy & Security Disclaimers Vulnerability Disclosure Sign up for email updates Enter your email address Sign up National Cancer Institute at the National Institutes of Health Contact Us Live Chat 1-800-4-CANCER NCIinfo@nih.gov Site Feedback Follow us Facebook Follow on X Instagram Youtube Linkedin U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health National Cancer Institute USA.gov