High Blood Pressure - What Is High Blood Pressure? | NHLBI, NIH Skip to main content An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( A locked padlock ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites. Search Query: Health Topics All Health Topics A-Z Asthma Heart-Healthy Living High Blood Pressure Sickle Cell Disease Sleep Apnea Calculate Your BMI Health Education Education Programs and Initiatives The Heart Truth® Learn More Breathe Better® Blood Diseases & Disorders Education Program Publications and Resources Research Clinical Trials and Studies Research Focus Areas Blood Disorders and Blood Safety Sleep Science and Sleep Disorders Lung Diseases Health Disparities Heart and Vascular Diseases Precision Medicine Activities Obesity, Nutrition, and Physical Activity Population and Epidemiology Studies Women’s Health Research Topics All Science A-Z Grants and Training Grants and Training Home Policies and Guidelines Funding Opportunities and Contacts Training and Career Development News and Events News and Events Home Email Alerts All News NHLBI News NHLBI in the Press Featured Article Ask a Scientist All Events Past Events Upcoming Events About NHLBI About NHLBI Home Mission and Strategic Vision Leadership Divisions, Offices and Centers Advisory Committees Budget and Legislative Information Jobs and Working at the NHLBI Contact and FAQs NIH Sleep Research Plan HOME Search Text: High Blood Pressure Home < Back To Health Topics High Blood Pressure 0 High Blood Pressure MENU Home < Back To Health Topics High Blood Pressure What Is High Blood Pressure? Symptoms Diagnosis Causes and Risk Factors Treatment Living With High Blood Pressure Pregnancy and High Blood Pressure MORE INFORMATION Participate in a Study Fact Sheets and Handouts Research High Blood Pressure High Blood Pressure What Is High Blood Pressure? Language switcher English Español High blood pressure, or hypertension, is a common condition that occurs when your blood pressure—the force of the blood on the walls of your arteries—is often too high. Medical Animation Copyright © Nucleus Medical Media, All rights reserved. Half of all American adults have high blood pressure, also known as hypertension. Many don’t even know it. High blood pressure develops when blood flows through your  arteries  at higher-than-normal pressures. Blood pressures are written as two numbers separated by a slash like this: 120/80 mm Hg. You can say this as “120 over 80 millimeters of mercury” or just as “120 over 80.” The first number is your  systolic pressure — that’s the force of the blood flow when blood is pumped out of the heart. The second number is your  diastolic pressure, which is measured between heartbeats when the heart is filling with blood. Your blood pressure changes throughout the day based on your activities. A healthy systolic blood pressure is less than 120 mm Hg. A healthy diastolic pressure is less than 80 mm Hg. Your blood pressure is high when you have consistent systolic readings of 130 mm Hg or higher, or diastolic readings of 80 mm Hg or higher. Blood pressure levels Blood Pressure Category Systolic and Diastolic Pressure (mm Hg) Normal Less than 120 systolic pressure AND Less than 80 diastolic pressure Elevated 120 to 129 systolic pressure AND Less than 80 diastolic pressure High Blood Pressure Stage 1 130 to 139 systolic pressure OR 80 to 89 diastolic pressure High Blood Pressure Stage 2 140 or higher systolic pressure OR 90 or higher diastolic pressure Hypertensive Crisis    Higher than 180 systolic pressure OR Higher than 120 diastolic pressure Contact your provider immediately. Symptoms  from high blood pressure don’t usually occur until it causes serious health problems. About 1 in 3 U.S. adults with high blood pressure aren’t even aware they have it and are not being treated to control their blood pressure. That’s why it is important to have your blood pressure checked at least once a year. Regular monitoring using home blood pressure is also recommended. To control or lower high blood pressure, your healthcare provider may recommend that you adopt a heart-healthy lifestyle that includes: Choosing a heart-healthy dietary pattern and foods such as those in the DASH eating plan , the Dietary Guidelines for Americans, or the Mediterranean eating pattern Being physically active and reducing sedentary behavior Losing weight for people with overweight or obesity Quitting smoking Reducing stress Getting enough good-quality sleep Your healthcare provider may also recommend medicines to help control your blood pressure. Controlling your blood pressure can help prevent or delay serious health problems such as chronic kidney disease , heart attack , heart failure , stroke , and possibly vascular dementia . Find research studies and get resources on high blood pressure . Book traversal links for High Blood Pressure Next Symptoms Last updated on April 25, 2024 Back To Top Link Back to top Web Policies & Notices Accessibility No FEAR Act Data Privacy Policy Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) HHS Vulnerability Disclosure Related Government Websites Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Office of the Inspector General USA.gov Stay Connected Live Chat   Live Chat with us, Monday through Friday, 8:30 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. EST. Get Email Alerts Receive automatic alerts about NHLBI related news and highlights from across the Institute. Footer Bottom Contact Us Site Index Jobs