Coronary Heart Disease - What Is Coronary Heart Disease? | NHLBI, NIH Skip to main content An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( A locked padlock ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites. Search Query: Health Topics All Health Topics A-Z Asthma Heart-Healthy Living High Blood Pressure Sickle Cell Disease Sleep Apnea Calculate Your BMI Health Education Education Programs and Initiatives The Heart Truth® Learn More Breathe Better® Blood Diseases & Disorders Education Program Publications and Resources Research Clinical Trials and Studies Research Focus Areas Blood Disorders and Blood Safety Sleep Science and Sleep Disorders Lung Diseases Health Disparities Heart and Vascular Diseases Precision Medicine Activities Obesity, Nutrition, and Physical Activity Population and Epidemiology Studies Women’s Health Research Topics All Science A-Z Grants and Training Grants and Training Home Policies and Guidelines Funding Opportunities and Contacts Training and Career Development News and Events News and Events Home Email Alerts All News NHLBI News NHLBI in the Press Featured Article Ask a Scientist All Events Past Events Upcoming Events About NHLBI About NHLBI Home Mission and Strategic Vision Leadership Divisions, Offices and Centers Advisory Committees Budget and Legislative Information Jobs and Working at the NHLBI Contact and FAQs NIH Sleep Research Plan HOME Search Text: Coronary Heart Disease < Back To Home Coronary Heart Disease 0 Coronary Heart Disease MENU < Back To Home Coronary Heart Disease What Is Coronary Heart Disease? Symptoms Diagnosis Risk Factors Causes and Prevention Treatment Living With Women and Heart Disease MORE INFORMATION Participate in a Study Fact Sheets and Handouts Research Coronary Heart Disease Coronary Heart Disease What Is Coronary Heart Disease? Language switcher English Español Heart disease is a general term for conditions that affect the heart’s structure and how it works. Heart disease is the leading cause of death in the United States.  Coronary heart disease is a type of heart disease that occurs when the arteries of the heart cannot deliver enough oxygen -rich blood to the heart muscle due to narrowing from the buildup of fatty deposits called plaque . It is also sometimes called coronary artery disease or ischemic heart disease. Coronary heart disease is the most common type of heart disease. In 2022, coronary heart disease caused 371,506 deaths in the United States. Symptoms of coronary heart disease vary from person to person. About 1 in 20 adults aged 20 and older have coronary heart disease. But many people don't know they have the disease until they have chest pain ; the blood flow to their heart is blocked, causing a heart attack ; or their heart suddenly stops pumping blood, also known as cardiac arrest . Coronary heart disease affects the larger coronary arteries on the surface of the heart. It is caused by deposits of cholesterol , a waxy substance that builds up inside the lining of the coronary arteries, forming plaque . This plaque can partly or completely block blood flow in the arteries of the heart: Obstructive coronary artery disease means that the diameter of a large coronary artery is blocked by 50% or more. Nonobstructive coronary artery disease means that the blood flow in a large coronary artery is blocked less than 50%. Coronary microvascular disease means blood flow into the tiny arteries within the heart muscle is blocked. This happens when there is damage to the inner walls of the heart's small blood vessels. Coronary microvascular disease is more common in women . For most people, coronary heart disease is preventable with a heart-healthy lifestyle and medicines. You may be able to stop or reverse plaque buildup in coronary arteries. Learn more about how the heart works . Your healthcare provider will diagnose coronary heart disease based on your symptoms , your medical and family history, your risk factors , and the results from heart tests . If you have coronary heart disease, you may need heart-healthy lifestyle changes, medicines, surgery , or a combination of these to manage your condition and prevent serious problems . FACTSHEET Know the Difference  Learn basic facts about the various diseases that affect the heart. View the fact sheet Book traversal links for Coronary Heart Disease Next Symptoms Last updated on December 27, 2024 Back To Top Link Back to top Web Policies & Notices Accessibility No FEAR Act Data Privacy Policy Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) HHS Vulnerability Disclosure Related Government Websites Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Office of the Inspector General USA.gov Stay Connected Live Chat   Live Chat with us, Monday through Friday, 8:30 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. EST. Get Email Alerts Receive automatic alerts about NHLBI related news and highlights from across the Institute. Footer Bottom Contact Us Site Index Jobs