COPD - What Is COPD? | NHLBI, NIH Skip to main content An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( A locked padlock ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites. Search Query: Health Topics All Health Topics A-Z Asthma Heart-Healthy Living High Blood Pressure Sickle Cell Disease Sleep Apnea Calculate Your BMI Health Education Education Programs and Initiatives The Heart Truth® Learn More Breathe Better® Blood Diseases & Disorders Education Program Publications and Resources Research Clinical Trials and Studies Research Focus Areas Blood Disorders and Blood Safety Sleep Science and Sleep Disorders Lung Diseases Health Disparities Heart and Vascular Diseases Precision Medicine Activities Obesity, Nutrition, and Physical Activity Population and Epidemiology Studies Women’s Health Research Topics All Science A-Z Grants and Training Grants and Training Home Policies and Guidelines Funding Opportunities and Contacts Training and Career Development News and Events News and Events Home Email Alerts All News NHLBI News NHLBI in the Press Featured Article Ask a Scientist All Events Past Events Upcoming Events About NHLBI About NHLBI Home Mission and Strategic Vision Leadership Divisions, Offices and Centers Advisory Committees Budget and Legislative Information Jobs and Working at the NHLBI Contact and FAQs NIH Sleep Research Plan HOME Search Text: COPD Home < Back To Health Topics COPD 0 COPD MENU Home < Back To Health Topics COPD What Is COPD? Symptoms Diagnosis Causes and Risk Factors Prevention Treatment Living With Women and COPD Related Conditions Alpha-1 Antitrypsin Deficiency MORE INFORMATION Participate in a Study Fact Sheets and Handouts Research COPD COPD What Is COPD? Language switcher English Español COPD Basics Learn who is at risk for COPD, what symptoms to watch for, and how the disease affects the lungs.  COPD, or  chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, is a condition caused by damage to the airways or other parts of the lung. This damage leads to inflammation and other problems that block airflow and make it hard to breathe.  COPD can cause coughing that produces large amounts of a slimy substance called mucus . It can also cause breathing problems, shortness of breath, chest tightness, and other symptoms . Because COPD is a progressive disease, its symptoms often develop slowly but worsen over time and can limit your ability to do routine activities. Serious COPD may prevent you from doing even basic activities such as walking, cooking, or taking care of yourself.  The term COPD refers to two main conditions: Emphysema develops when there is damage to the walls between many of the air sacs in the lungs. Normally, these sacs are elastic or stretchy. When you breathe in, each air sac fills up with air, like a small balloon. When you breathe out, the air sacs deflate, and the air goes out. In emphysema, it is harder for your lungs to move air out of your body.  Chronic (long-term) bronchitis is caused by repeated or constant irritation and inflammation in the lining of the airways. A lot of thick mucus forms in the airways, making it hard to breathe.  Most people who have COPD have a mixture of both emphysema and chronic bronchitis in different proportions, and how serious each condition is varies from person to person.  In the United States, COPD affects more than 14 million adults, and many others do not know they have it. More than half of those diagnosed are women. Rates are higher than average in American Indian and Alaska Native communities and in rural areas. COPD is a major cause of disability, and it is the sixth leading cause of death in the United States, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. INFOGRAPHIC COPD in Rural Communities Infographic Learn what makes COPD a disease of rural America and how to take action. View the infographic.   The good news is that COPD can often be prevented, mainly by not smoking. In the United States and other high-income countries, cigarette smoking is the main cause of COPD. Most people who have COPD smoke or used to smoke. Worldwide, however, tobacco is related to just half of all COPD cases. In the developing world, air pollution plays a much larger role. A genetic condition called alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency can also cause the disease.     If you have smoked or have COPD symptoms, ask your healthcare provider about your risk of COPD. Even people in their 40s have higher rates of COPD than the population overall, so don’t hesitate to ask. Although there is no cure, treatments and lifestyle changes such as quitting smoking can help you feel better, stay more active, and slow the progress of the disease. You may also need  oxygen  therapy, pulmonary rehabilitation, or medicines to treat complications.  QUICK GUIDE A Quick Guide on COPD This guide provides an overview of COPD and its symptoms. View the quick guide. Book traversal links for COPD Previous COPD Next Symptoms Last updated on November 08, 2024 Back To Top Link Back to top Web Policies & Notices Accessibility No FEAR Act Data Privacy Policy Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) HHS Vulnerability Disclosure Related Government Websites Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Office of the Inspector General USA.gov Stay Connected Live Chat   Live Chat with us, Monday through Friday, 8:30 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. EST. Get Email Alerts Receive automatic alerts about NHLBI related news and highlights from across the Institute. Footer Bottom Contact Us Site Index Jobs