Atrial Fibrillation - What Is Atrial Fibrillation? | NHLBI, NIH Skip to main content An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( A locked padlock ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites. Search Query: Health Topics All Health Topics A-Z Asthma Heart-Healthy Living High Blood Pressure Sickle Cell Disease Sleep Apnea Calculate Your BMI Health Education Education Programs and Initiatives The Heart Truth® Learn More Breathe Better® Blood Diseases & Disorders Education Program Publications and Resources Research Clinical Trials and Studies Research Focus Areas Blood Disorders and Blood Safety Sleep Science and Sleep Disorders Lung Diseases Health Disparities Heart and Vascular Diseases Precision Medicine Activities Obesity, Nutrition, and Physical Activity Population and Epidemiology Studies Women’s Health Research Topics All Science A-Z Grants and Training Grants and Training Home Policies and Guidelines Funding Opportunities and Contacts Training and Career Development News and Events News and Events Home Email Alerts All News NHLBI News NHLBI in the Press Featured Article Ask a Scientist All Events Past Events Upcoming Events About NHLBI About NHLBI Home Mission and Strategic Vision Leadership Divisions, Offices and Centers Advisory Committees Budget and Legislative Information Jobs and Working at the NHLBI Contact and FAQs NIH Sleep Research Plan HOME Search Text: Atrial Fibrillation Home < Back To Health Topics Atrial Fibrillation 0 Atrial Fibrillation MENU Home < Back To Health Topics Atrial Fibrillation What Is Atrial Fibrillation? Types Symptoms Diagnosis Causes and Risk Factors Treatment Living With MORE INFORMATION Participate in a Study Fact Sheets and More Atrial Fibrillation Atrial Fibrillation What Is Atrial Fibrillation? Language switcher English Español Atrial fibrillation, also known as A-fib or AF, affects more than 2 million adults in the United States and is one of the most common types of  arrhythmias (irregular heart rhythms). The risk of developing A-fib increases with age. That means that as the average age in the United States increases, more people will be affected by this condition. Atrial fibrillation causes your heart to beat irregularly and sometimes much faster than normal. Also, your heart’s upper and lower chambers do not work together as they should. When this happens, the lower chambers do not fill completely or pump enough blood to your lungs and body. This can make you feel tired, lightheaded, or dizzy. You may also feel like your heart is skipping a beat, fluttering, pounding, or beating too hard or fast. You may also feel chest pain. Blood may pool in your heart, which increases your risk of forming clots and can lead to strokes or other complications. Atrial fibrillation can also occur without any  symptoms , which can make it hard to diagnose. Atrial fibrillation may cause heart disease or worsen existing heart disease. . If left untreated, atrial fibrillation can lead to serious and even life-threatening  complications , like stroke or heart failure Sometimes atrial fibrillation goes away on its own. For some people, atrial fibrillation is an ongoing heart problem that lasts for years. Over time, the irregular heart rhythm may happen more often and each episode may last longer.  Your healthcare provider may recommend medicines, medical procedures, and lifestyle changes to treat your atrial fibrillation. Treatment  may restore normal heart rhythm, help control your heart rate and symptoms, and prevent complications. Book traversal links for Atrial Fibrillation Next Types Last updated on November 30, 2022 Back To Top Link Back to top Web Policies & Notices Accessibility No FEAR Act Data Privacy Policy Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) HHS Vulnerability Disclosure Related Government Websites Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Office of the Inspector General USA.gov Stay Connected Live Chat   Live Chat with us, Monday through Friday, 8:30 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. EST. Get Email Alerts Receive automatic alerts about NHLBI related news and highlights from across the Institute. Footer Bottom Contact Us Site Index Jobs