Stroke - What Is a Stroke? | NHLBI, NIH Skip to main content An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( A locked padlock ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites. Search Query: Health Topics All Health Topics A-Z Asthma Heart-Healthy Living High Blood Pressure Sickle Cell Disease Sleep Apnea Calculate Your BMI Health Education Education Programs and Initiatives The Heart Truth® Learn More Breathe Better® Blood Diseases & Disorders Education Program Publications and Resources Research Clinical Trials and Studies Research Focus Areas Blood Disorders and Blood Safety Sleep Science and Sleep Disorders Lung Diseases Health Disparities Heart and Vascular Diseases Precision Medicine Activities Obesity, Nutrition, and Physical Activity Population and Epidemiology Studies Women’s Health Research Topics All Science A-Z Grants and Training Grants and Training Home Policies and Guidelines Funding Opportunities and Contacts Training and Career Development News and Events News and Events Home Email Alerts All News NHLBI News NHLBI in the Press Featured Article Ask a Scientist All Events Past Events Upcoming Events About NHLBI About NHLBI Home Mission and Strategic Vision Leadership Divisions, Offices and Centers Advisory Committees Budget and Legislative Information Jobs and Working at the NHLBI Contact and FAQs NIH Sleep Research Plan HOME Search Text: Stroke Home < Back To Health Topics Stroke 0 Stroke MENU Home < Back To Health Topics Stroke What Is a Stroke? Symptoms Diagnosis Causes and Risk Factors Treatment Recovery Stroke During Pregnancy MORE INFORMATION Participate in a Study Fact Sheets and Handouts Research Stroke Stroke What Is a Stroke? Language switcher English Español A stroke can occur when blood flow to the brain is blocked or there is sudden bleeding in the brain. There are two types of strokes. A stroke that occurs because blood flow to the brain is blocked is called an ischemic stroke. The brain cannot get oxygen and nutrients from the blood. Without oxygen and nutrients, brain cells begin to die within minutes. A stroke that occurs because of sudden bleeding in the brain is called a hemorrhagic stroke. The leaked blood results in pressure on brain cells, damaging them. Watch this video to help you understand what a stroke is and the risk factors for having one. Medical Animation Copyright © Nucleus Medical Media, All rights reserved. Click here to view this video with an audio description . Just under 90% of strokes involve blocked blood vessels (ischemic), and the rest involve internal bleeding (hemorrhagic). Strokes are further classified based on where in the brain the blockage or bleeding occurs. A stroke is a medical emergency. A stroke can cause lasting brain damage, long-term disability, or even death. Signs of a stroke can range from mild weakness to paralysis or numbness on one side of the face or body. Other signs may include a sudden and severe headache, sudden weakness, trouble seeing, and trouble speaking or understanding speech. If you think you or someone else may be having a stroke, call 9-1-1 right away. Do not drive to the hospital or let someone else drive you. Call an ambulance so that medical personnel can begin lifesaving treatment on the way to the emergency room. During a stroke, every minute counts. At the hospital, a stroke team will assess your condition and treat your stroke with medicine, surgery, or another procedure. Your recovery will depend on how serious your stroke was and how quickly you were treated. A rehabilitation plan may help you get back to what you used to do before you had a stroke. Book traversal links for Stroke Next Symptoms Last updated on May 26, 2023 Back To Top Link Back to top Web Policies & Notices Accessibility No FEAR Act Data Privacy Policy Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) HHS Vulnerability Disclosure Related Government Websites Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Office of the Inspector General USA.gov Stay Connected Live Chat   Live Chat with us, Monday through Friday, 8:30 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. EST. Get Email Alerts Receive automatic alerts about NHLBI related news and highlights from across the Institute. Footer Bottom Contact Us Site Index Jobs