Sleep Apnea - What Is Sleep Apnea? | NHLBI, NIH Skip to main content An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( A locked padlock ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites. Search Query: Health Topics All Health Topics A-Z Asthma Heart-Healthy Living High Blood Pressure Sickle Cell Disease Sleep Apnea Calculate Your BMI Health Education Education Programs and Initiatives The Heart Truth® Learn More Breathe Better® Blood Diseases & Disorders Education Program Publications and Resources Research Clinical Trials and Studies Research Focus Areas Blood Disorders and Blood Safety Sleep Science and Sleep Disorders Lung Diseases Health Disparities Heart and Vascular Diseases Precision Medicine Activities Obesity, Nutrition, and Physical Activity Population and Epidemiology Studies Women’s Health Research Topics All Science A-Z Grants and Training Grants and Training Home Policies and Guidelines Funding Opportunities and Contacts Training and Career Development News and Events News and Events Home Email Alerts All News NHLBI News NHLBI in the Press Featured Article Ask a Scientist All Events Past Events Upcoming Events About NHLBI About NHLBI Home Mission and Strategic Vision Leadership Divisions, Offices and Centers Advisory Committees Budget and Legislative Information Jobs and Working at the NHLBI Contact and FAQs NIH Sleep Research Plan HOME Search Text: Sleep Apnea Home < Back To Health Topics Sleep Apnea 0 Sleep Apnea MENU Home < Back To Health Topics Sleep Apnea What Is Sleep Apnea? Symptoms Diagnosis Causes and Risk Factors Treatment Living With Sleep Apnea and Women Sleep Apnea in Children MORE INFORMATION Participate in a Study Fact Sheets and Handouts Research Sleep Apnea Sleep Apnea What Is Sleep Apnea? Language switcher English Español Sleep apnea is a common condition that occurs when your breathing stops and restarts many times while you sleep. This can prevent your body from getting enough oxygen. If someone tells you that you snore or gasp for air during sleep, you may want to talk to your healthcare provider. You may also want to ask your provider about sleep apnea if you experience other symptoms of poor sleep quality, such as excessive daytime sleepiness. There are two types of sleep apnea. Obstructive sleep apnea , also called OSA, happens when your upper airway becomes blocked many times while you sleep. The blockage can reduce or completely stop airflow. This is the most common type of sleep apnea. Factors such as obesity , large tonsils, or changes in your  hormone  levels can narrow your airway. Any of these factors could increase your risk for obstructive sleep apnea. Central sleep apnea occurs when your brain does not send the signals needed to breathe. Health conditions that affect how your brain controls your airways and chest muscles can cause central sleep apnea. What is sleep apnea? Learn about the symptoms and health effects of untreated sleep apnea. To diagnose sleep apnea , your provider may have you do a sleep study. Breathing devices, such as continuous positive air pressure (CPAP) machines, and lifestyle changes are common sleep apnea treatments . If these treatments do not work, your provider may recommend surgery to correct the problem that is causing your sleep apnea. If your sleep apnea is not diagnosed or treated, you may not get enough quality sleep. This can lead to issues with concentrating, making decisions, remembering things, or controlling your behavior. Untreated sleep apnea increases the risk for stroke , heart attack , and other serious problems . About 50 to 70 million Americans have a sleep disorder. To learn about NHLBI sleep research and find more sleep-related information, visit the Sleep Health Education and Awareness pages . Book traversal links for Sleep Apnea Next Symptoms Last updated on January 09, 2025 Back To Top Link Back to top Web Policies & Notices Accessibility No FEAR Act Data Privacy Policy Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) HHS Vulnerability Disclosure Related Government Websites Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Office of the Inspector General USA.gov Stay Connected Live Chat   Live Chat with us, Monday through Friday, 8:30 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. EST. Get Email Alerts Receive automatic alerts about NHLBI related news and highlights from across the Institute. Footer Bottom Contact Us Site Index Jobs