Blood Cholesterol - What is Blood Cholesterol? | NHLBI, NIH Skip to main content An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( A locked padlock ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites. Search Query: Health Topics All Health Topics A-Z Asthma Heart-Healthy Living High Blood Pressure Sickle Cell Disease Sleep Apnea Calculate Your BMI Health Education Education Programs and Initiatives The Heart Truth® Learn More Breathe Better® Blood Diseases & Disorders Education Program Publications and Resources Research Clinical Trials and Studies Research Focus Areas Blood Disorders and Blood Safety Sleep Science and Sleep Disorders Lung Diseases Health Disparities Heart and Vascular Diseases Precision Medicine Activities Obesity, Nutrition, and Physical Activity Population and Epidemiology Studies Women’s Health Research Topics All Science A-Z Grants and Training Grants and Training Home Policies and Guidelines Funding Opportunities and Contacts Training and Career Development News and Events News and Events Home Email Alerts All News NHLBI News NHLBI in the Press Featured Article Ask a Scientist All Events Past Events Upcoming Events About NHLBI About NHLBI Home Mission and Strategic Vision Leadership Divisions, Offices and Centers Advisory Committees Budget and Legislative Information Jobs and Working at the NHLBI Contact and FAQs NIH Sleep Research Plan HOME Search Text: Blood Cholesterol < Back To Home Blood Cholesterol 0 Blood Cholesterol MENU < Back To Home Blood Cholesterol What is Blood Cholesterol? Symptoms Diagnosis Causes and Risk Factors Treatment Living With High Cholesterol MORE INFORMATION Participate in a Study Fact Sheets and Handouts Blood Cholesterol Blood Cholesterol What is Blood Cholesterol? Language switcher English Español Watch this video to see how cholesterol flowing through your bloodstream can build up on the wall of the blood vessel over time. This forms plaque that can partially block blood flow through the blood vessel. Medical Animation Copyright © Nucleus Medical Media, All rights reserved. Click here to view this video with an audio description . Cholesterol is a waxy, fat-like substance that your body needs for good health, but in the right amounts. Lipoproteins  are small, round particles made of  lipids  (fats) and  proteins . These particles carry cholesterol in your blood and throughout your body. Two types of lipoproteins include: Low-density lipoprotein (LDL), sometimes called “bad” cholesterol High-density lipoprotein (HDL), sometimes called “good” cholesterol High levels of “bad” LDL cholesterol may create a buildup of  plaque  (fatty deposits) in your  arteries . This buildup can lead to a heart attack, stroke, or other health problems. High levels of “good” HDL cholesterol may lower your risk for health problems. HDL cholesterol carries cholesterol and plaque to the liver to be flushed out of the body. The  genes  you  inherit  and your lifestyle habits play a major role in your cholesterol levels. Routine blood tests can show whether your cholesterol levels are healthy or unhealthy. To help get your cholesterol levels into the healthy range, you may need heart-healthy lifestyle changes or medicines . Book traversal links for Blood Cholesterol Next Symptoms Last updated on April 17, 2024 Back To Top Link Back to top Web Policies & Notices Accessibility No FEAR Act Data Privacy Policy Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) HHS Vulnerability Disclosure Related Government Websites Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Office of the Inspector General USA.gov Stay Connected Live Chat   Live Chat with us, Monday through Friday, 8:30 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. EST. Get Email Alerts Receive automatic alerts about NHLBI related news and highlights from across the Institute. Footer Bottom Contact Us Site Index Jobs