Overweight and Obesity - What Are Overweight and Obesity? | NHLBI, NIH Skip to main content An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( A locked padlock ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites. Search Query: Health Topics All Health Topics A-Z Asthma Heart-Healthy Living High Blood Pressure Sickle Cell Disease Sleep Apnea Calculate Your BMI Health Education Education Programs and Initiatives The Heart Truth® Learn More Breathe Better® Blood Diseases & Disorders Education Program Publications and Resources Research Clinical Trials and Studies Research Focus Areas Blood Disorders and Blood Safety Sleep Science and Sleep Disorders Lung Diseases Health Disparities Heart and Vascular Diseases Precision Medicine Activities Obesity, Nutrition, and Physical Activity Population and Epidemiology Studies Women’s Health Research Topics All Science A-Z Grants and Training Grants and Training Home Policies and Guidelines Funding Opportunities and Contacts Training and Career Development News and Events News and Events Home Email Alerts All News NHLBI News NHLBI in the Press Featured Article Ask a Scientist All Events Past Events Upcoming Events About NHLBI About NHLBI Home Mission and Strategic Vision Leadership Divisions, Offices and Centers Advisory Committees Budget and Legislative Information Jobs and Working at the NHLBI Contact and FAQs NIH Sleep Research Plan HOME Search Text: Overweight and Obesity < Back To Home Overweight and Obesity 0 Overweight and Obesity MENU < Back To Home Overweight and Obesity What Are Overweight and Obesity? Symptoms and Diagnosis Prevention Causes and Risk Factors Treatment Management Childhood Obesity Obesity and Women&#039;s Health Related Conditions Obesity Hypoventilation Syndrome MORE INFORMATION Participate in a Study Fact Sheets and Handouts Research Overweight and Obesity Overweight and Obesity What Are Overweight and Obesity? Language switcher English Español Overweight and obesity are common conditions in the United States that are defined as the increase in size and amount of fat cells in the body. Overweight and obesity are caused by many factors including behaviors like eating patterns, lack of sleep or physical activity, and some medicines, as well as genetics and family history. Obesity is a chronic health condition that raises the risk for heart disease — the leading cause of death in the United States — and is linked to many other health problems, including type 2 diabetes and cancer. Nearly 3 in 4 adults age 20 or older in the United States have either overweight or obesity. Nearly 1 in 5 children and teens ages 2 to 19 years have obesity. Overweight and obesity can lead to serious health issues for people of all ages. Healthcare providers use body mass index (BMI) to screen for overweight and obesity in adults. BMI is a measure of body fat based on height and weight and is defined as the body mass (in kilograms) divided by the square of the body height (in meters) and expressed in units of kg/m². Your provider may talk to you about overweight and obesity if your BMI shows that your weight is above average for your height. But there is more to obesity than BMI. Unhealthy lifestyle habits, such as not getting enough physical activity and eating high-calorie, low-nutrient foods and beverages, can raise your risk of overweight and obesity . Some people find that their weight goes up when they start taking medicine for another health condition such as diabetes, depression, or high blood pressure . Talk to your provider before you consider stopping any medicine you are taking for another condition that you think is also impacting your weight. Lifestyle changes that can reduce weight include following a heart-healthy eating plan lower in calories and unhealthy saturated fats and increasing physical activity. The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has also approved medicines and other treatments for weight loss. Surgery may also be a treatment option but is not available for everyone. Book traversal links for Overweight and Obesity Next Symptoms and Diagnosis Last updated on March 24, 2022 Back To Top Link Back to top Web Policies & Notices Accessibility No FEAR Act Data Privacy Policy Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) HHS Vulnerability Disclosure Related Government Websites Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Office of the Inspector General USA.gov Stay Connected Live Chat   Live Chat with us, Monday through Friday, 8:30 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. EST. Get Email Alerts Receive automatic alerts about NHLBI related news and highlights from across the Institute. Footer Bottom Contact Us Site Index Jobs