Heart Failure - What Is Heart Failure? | NHLBI, NIH Skip to main content An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( A locked padlock ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites. Search Query: Health Topics All Health Topics A-Z Asthma Heart-Healthy Living High Blood Pressure Sickle Cell Disease Sleep Apnea Calculate Your BMI Health Education Education Programs and Initiatives The Heart Truth® Learn More Breathe Better® Blood Diseases & Disorders Education Program Publications and Resources Research Clinical Trials and Studies Research Focus Areas Blood Disorders and Blood Safety Sleep Science and Sleep Disorders Lung Diseases Health Disparities Heart and Vascular Diseases Precision Medicine Activities Obesity, Nutrition, and Physical Activity Population and Epidemiology Studies Women’s Health Research Topics All Science A-Z Grants and Training Grants and Training Home Policies and Guidelines Funding Opportunities and Contacts Training and Career Development News and Events News and Events Home Email Alerts All News NHLBI News NHLBI in the Press Featured Article Ask a Scientist All Events Past Events Upcoming Events About NHLBI About NHLBI Home Mission and Strategic Vision Leadership Divisions, Offices and Centers Advisory Committees Budget and Legislative Information Jobs and Working at the NHLBI Contact and FAQs NIH Sleep Research Plan HOME Search Text: Heart Failure < Back To Home Heart Failure 0 Heart Failure MENU < Back To Home Heart Failure What Is Heart Failure? Symptoms Diagnosis Causes and Risk Factors Treatment Living With Heart Failure MORE INFORMATION Participate in a Study Fact Sheet and Handouts Research Heart Failure Heart Failure What Is Heart Failure? Language switcher English Español Heart failure, also known as congestive heart failure, is a condition that develops when your heart doesn’t pump enough blood for your body’s needs. This can happen if your heart can’t fill up with enough blood. It can also happen when your heart is too weak to pump properly. The term "heart failure" does not mean that your heart has stopped. However, heart failure is a serious condition that needs medical care. More than 6 million adults in the United States have heart failure, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Children can also have heart failure, but this health topic focuses on heart failure in adults. Heart failure can develop suddenly (the acute kind) or over time as your heart gets weaker (the chronic kind). It can affect one or both sides of your heart. Left-sided and right-sided heart failure may have different causes. Most often, heart failure is caused by another medical condition that damages your heart. This includes coronary heart disease , heart inflammation , high blood pressure , cardiomyopathy , or an irregular heartbeat. Heart failure may not cause symptoms right away. But eventually, you may feel tired and short of breath and notice fluid buildup in your lower body, around your stomach, or your neck. Heart failure can damage your liver or kidneys. Other conditions it can lead to include pulmonary hypertension or other heart conditions, such as an irregular heartbeat , heart valve disease , and sudden cardiac arrest . Your doctor will diagnose heart failure based on your medical and family history, a physical exam, and results from imaging and blood tests. Currently, heart failure is a serious condition that has no cure. However, treatment such as healthy lifestyle changes, medicines, some devices, and procedures can help many people have a higher quality of life. Visit the Living With section to learn more. Visit The Heart Truth to learn about heart disease in women. Book traversal links for Heart Failure Next Symptoms Last updated on March 24, 2022 Back To Top Link Back to top Web Policies & Notices Accessibility No FEAR Act Data Privacy Policy Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) HHS Vulnerability Disclosure Related Government Websites Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Office of the Inspector General USA.gov Stay Connected Live Chat   Live Chat with us, Monday through Friday, 8:30 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. EST. Get Email Alerts Receive automatic alerts about NHLBI related news and highlights from across the Institute. Footer Bottom Contact Us Site Index Jobs