Alzheimer&#039;s and dementia | National Institute on Aging Skip to main content An official website of the United States government Here's how you know Here's how you know U.S. Department of Health & Human Services (HHS) National Institutes of Health (NIH) The .gov means it’s official. Federal government websites often end in .gov or .mil. Before sharing sensitive information, make sure you’re on a federal government site. The site is secure. The https:// ensures that you are connecting to the official website and that any information you provide is encrypted and transmitted securely. Menu Search Search Close Menu Health Information A-Z Health Topics Alzheimer’s & Dementia Brain Health Caregiving End of Life Exercise and Physical Activity Healthy Eating Español Download Publications (PDF) Infographics Resources for Health Care Professionals Research & Funding All Research & Funding Blog - Inside NIA Clinical Trials Training & Career Development Grants & Funding Health Disparities Research Research Resources Labs at NIA Division of Aging Biology Division of Behavioral and Social Research Division of Geriatrics and Clinical Gerontology Division of Neuroscience Division of Extramural Activities Quick Links NIA-Specific Funding Policies Small Business Program Alzheimer&#039;s Disease and Related Dementias Funding Announcements Data Sharing Resources for Researchers News & Events All News & Events News Releases Announcements Events Research Highlights Workshops Multimedia Quick Links Media Inquiries Alzheimer’s & Related Dementias Press Kit About NIA All About NIA Budget & Testimony Strategic Directions National Advisory Council on Aging (NACA) Advances in Aging and Alzheimer&#039;s Research Staff Directory Careers Student Resources Connect with NIA Contact NIA Contact NIA --> Español Search Search Home Health Information Alzheimer’s & Dementia Share: Print page Facebook share Linkedin share X social media share Alzheimer&#039;s and dementia Alzheimer’s disease is the mostly commonly diagnosed form of dementia in older adults. Learn more about the disease, including diagnosis and treatment, and find tips and resources for caregivers and people living with dementia. Related topics: Alzheimer’s causes and risk factors , Alzheimer’s symptoms and diagnosis , Alzheimer’s treatment , Alzheimer’s caregiving 10 Frequently Asked Questions About Alzheimer&#039;s Disease Learn about Alzheimer’s disease in these FAQs from the National Institute on Aging. About the ADEAR Center Find out how the Alzheimer&#039;s and related Dementias Education and Referral (ADEAR) Center can help you with answers and resources. Alzheimer&#039;s Disease Fact Sheet What is Alzheimer’s disease, what causes it, what are the symptoms, and how is it treated? Get answers to these questions and more in this NIA fact sheet. Infographic: Dementia Is an Umbrella Term View and download an infographic about how dementia is an umbrella term to describe a range of neurological conditions. Infographic: Making Healthy Lifestyle Choices May Reduce Your Risk of Dementia View an infographic on steps you can take that may help lower your risk for dementia. Infographic: Millions of Americans Are Estimated To Have Alzheimer&#039;s Disease View an infographic on Alzheimer&#039;s disease. Infographic: Steps to Take After a Dementia Diagnosis View an infographic with a checklist of steps you can take after a dementia diagnosis. Infographic: Understanding Different Types of Dementia View an infographic on four different types of dementia, including what&#039;s happening in the brain and symptoms. Preventing Alzheimer&#039;s Disease: What Do We Know? What can you do to prevent Alzheimer’s disease? Read the latest evidence for promising prevention strategies, including physical activity, blood pressure control, and cognitive training. Tips for Living Alone With Early-Stage Dementia These tips for people living alone with Alzheimer&#039;s disease or a related dementia are designed to help people cope with changes in memory and thinking, prepare for the future, and stay active. Current page 1 Page 2 Next Return to top Quick links About NIA A-Z health topics Clinical trials Careers at NIA Research divisions & contacts Staff directory NIA Policies and Notices Contact NIA niaic@nia.nih.gov 800-222-2225 Contact us Follow us Facebook X Linkedin YouTube Newsletters Sign up to receive updates and resources delivered to your inbox. Sign up --> nia.nih.gov An official website of the National Institutes of Health Accessibility support FOIA requests Office of the Inspector General Performance reports Vulnerability disclosure policy Privacy Policy USA.gov