Chronic Kidney Disease (CKD) - NIDDK Skip to main content The information provided on niddk.nih.gov is not being updated. Please refer to nih.gov . An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official government website icon Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. icon-https Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites. Search Menu Search for Information from NIDDK Entire Site Research & Funding Health Information News About NIDDK Search Home Research & Funding Expand Research & Funding Current Funding Opportunities Research Programs & Contacts Human Subjects Research Funding Process Research Training & Career Development Funded Grants & Grant History Research Resources Research at NIDDK Technology Advancement & Transfer Meetings & Workshops Health Information Expand Health Information Health Topics Diabetes Digestive Diseases Kidney Disease Weight Management Liver Disease Urologic Diseases Endocrine Diseases Diet & Nutrition Blood Diseases Diagnostic Tests La informaci&#243;n de la salud en espa&#241;ol Health Statistics Clinical Trials For Health Professionals Diabetes Discoveries & Practice Blog Community Health & Outreach News Expand News News Archive Meetings & Workshops Media Library Follow Us About NIDDK Expand About NIDDK Meet the Director Offices & Divisions Staff Directory Budget & Legislative Information Advisory & Coordinating Committees Strategic Plans & Reports Research Areas FAQs Jobs at NIDDK Visit Us Contact Us Home Health Information Kidney Disease Chronic Kidney Disease (CKD) English English Espa&#241;ol Related Topics Kidney Disease Acquired Cystic Kidney Disease Amyloidosis & Kidney Disease Anemia Chronic Kidney Disease (CKD) Hide child pages Causes of CKD Tests & Diagnosis Managing CKD Healthy Eating Preventing CKD What If My Kidneys Fail? Clinical Trials Diabetes Insipidus Glomerular Disease Show child pages Anti-GBM (Goodpasture’s) Disease Heart Disease High Blood Pressure & Kidney Disease IgA Nephropathy Keeping Kidneys Safe: Smart Choices about Medicines Kidney Disease in Children Show child pages Nephrotic Syndrome in Children Hemolytic Uremic Syndrome in Children Helping Your Child Adapt to Life with Chronic Kidney Disease Ectopic Kidney Medullary Sponge Kidney Multicystic Dysplastic Kidney Kidney Failure Show child pages What is Kidney Failure? Choosing a Treatment Hemodialysis Peritoneal Dialysis Kidney Transplant Conservative Management Eating Right Financial Help for Treatment of Kidney Failure Mineral & Bone Disorder Nephrotic Syndrome in Adults Polycystic Kidney Disease (PKD) Show child pages What is PKD? Autosomal Dominant PKD Autosomal Recessive PKD Eating, Diet, & Nutrition for PKD Renal Artery Stenosis Renal Tubular Acidosis Solitary or Single-functioning Kidney Your Kidneys & How They Work Chronic Kidney Disease (CKD) View or Print All Sections ​​What Is Chronic Kidney Disease? Chronic kidney disease (CKD) means your kidneys are damaged or have a problem with their structure and can’t filter blood the way they should. Key risk factors are diabetes, high blood pressure, heart disease, and a family history of kidney disease. Causes of Chronic Kidney Disease Diabetes and high blood pressure are the most common causes of chronic kidney disease in adults. Many other conditions can also cause CKD in adults. Tests & Diagnosis Testing may be the only way to know if you have kidney disease. Get checked if you have diabetes, high blood pressure, heart disease, or a family history of kidney failure. The sooner you know you have kidney disease, the sooner you can get treatment. Managing Chronic Kidney Disease You can take steps to protect your kidneys. The most important step you can take to treat kidney disease is to control your blood pressure. Healthy habits can also help you manage your kidney disease. Healthy Eating for Adults with Chronic Kidney Disease Choosing healthy foods and drinks can help you feel better and help keep your kidneys healthier longer. Work with a health care professional or registered dietitian to create a meal plan that includes foods you enjoy and that can help protect your kidneys. Preventing Chronic Kidney Disease You are at risk for kidney disease if you have diabetes, high blood pressure, heart disease, or a family history of kidney failure. If you have risk factors, get tested for kidney disease and protect your kidneys by making healthy food choices, being more active, aiming for a healthy weight, and managing health conditions that cause kidney damage. What if My Kidneys Fail? Kidney failure means that your kidneys have lost most of their ability to function. Work with your health care team and family to consider your options to replace your lost kidney function, such as dialysis or transplant. Choose a treatment that is right for you. Clinical Trials The National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases (NIDDK) and other components of the National Institutes of Health (NIH) conduct and support research into many diseases and conditions. Kidney Disease Topics View all Kidney Disease Topics Topics for Health Care Professionals Related Conditions & Diseases Kidney Stones Simple Kidney Cysts Pyelonephritis: Kidney Infection Kidney Disease in Children Is My Child at Risk for Kidney Disease? Overview of Kidney Disease in Children Childhood Nephrotic Syndrome Nutrition for CKD in Children Ectopic Kidney Additional Languages This content is also available in: Spanish Last Reviewed October 2016   Next: Causes of CKD This content is provided as a service of the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases (NIDDK), part of the National Institutes of Health. NIDDK translates and disseminates research findings to increase knowledge and understanding about health and disease among patients, health professionals, and the public. Content produced by NIDDK is carefully reviewed by NIDDK scientists and other experts. NIH… Turning Discovery Into Health ® Privacy Policy Freedom of Information Act Accessibility Disclaimers Copyright Vulnerability Disclosure Policy Site Map For Staff Only Get Email Updates U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health