Kidney Failure - NIDDK Skip to main content The information provided on niddk.nih.gov is not being updated. Please refer to nih.gov . An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official government website icon Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. icon-https Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites. Search Menu Search for Information from NIDDK Entire Site Research & Funding Health Information News About NIDDK Search Home Research & Funding Expand Research & Funding Current Funding Opportunities Research Programs & Contacts Human Subjects Research Funding Process Research Training & Career Development Funded Grants & Grant History Research Resources Research at NIDDK Technology Advancement & Transfer Meetings & Workshops Health Information Expand Health Information Health Topics Diabetes Digestive Diseases Kidney Disease Weight Management Liver Disease Urologic Diseases Endocrine Diseases Diet & Nutrition Blood Diseases Diagnostic Tests La informaci&#243;n de la salud en espa&#241;ol Health Statistics Clinical Trials For Health Professionals Diabetes Discoveries & Practice Blog Community Health & Outreach News Expand News News Archive Meetings & Workshops Media Library Follow Us About NIDDK Expand About NIDDK Meet the Director Offices & Divisions Staff Directory Budget & Legislative Information Advisory & Coordinating Committees Strategic Plans & Reports Research Areas FAQs Jobs at NIDDK Visit Us Contact Us Home Health Information Kidney Disease Kidney Failure English English Espa&#241;ol Related Topics Kidney Disease Acquired Cystic Kidney Disease Amyloidosis & Kidney Disease Anemia Chronic Kidney Disease (CKD) Show child pages Causes of CKD Tests & Diagnosis Managing CKD Healthy Eating Preventing CKD What If My Kidneys Fail? Clinical Trials Diabetes Insipidus Glomerular Disease Show child pages Anti-GBM (Goodpasture’s) Disease Heart Disease High Blood Pressure & Kidney Disease IgA Nephropathy Keeping Kidneys Safe: Smart Choices about Medicines Kidney Disease in Children Show child pages Nephrotic Syndrome in Children Hemolytic Uremic Syndrome in Children Helping Your Child Adapt to Life with Chronic Kidney Disease Ectopic Kidney Medullary Sponge Kidney Multicystic Dysplastic Kidney Kidney Failure Hide child pages What is Kidney Failure? Choosing a Treatment Hemodialysis Peritoneal Dialysis Kidney Transplant Conservative Management Eating Right Financial Help for Treatment of Kidney Failure Mineral & Bone Disorder Nephrotic Syndrome in Adults Polycystic Kidney Disease (PKD) Show child pages What is PKD? Autosomal Dominant PKD Autosomal Recessive PKD Eating, Diet, & Nutrition for PKD Renal Artery Stenosis Renal Tubular Acidosis Solitary or Single-functioning Kidney Your Kidneys & How They Work Kidney Failure View or Print All Sections What is Kidney Failure? Kidney disease can get worse over time and may lead to kidney failure. If less than 15 percent of your kidney is working normally, that’s considered kidney failure. You may have symptoms from the buildup of waste products and extra water in your body. The more you know about kidney failure ahead of time, the better prepared you may be to make a treatment choice and take charge of your care. Choosing a Treatment Learn about kidney failure treatment options early. Three treatment options filter your blood— hemodialysis, peritoneal dialysis, and kidney transplant. A fourth option—conservative management—offers care without dialysis or transplant. Each treatment has pros and cons, and your choice will affect your daily life. Hemodialysis Hemodialysis is a treatment to filter wastes and extra water from your blood. A machine pumps your blood through a filter outside of your body and returns filtered blood to your body. You can have this treatment in a center—usually three times each week—or at home. Peritoneal Dialysis Peritoneal dialysis is a treatment for kidney failure that you can do at home. This type of dialysis uses the lining of your belly to filter wastes and extra fluid from your body. Kidney Transplant During transplant surgery, a healthy kidney from a donor is placed into your body. The new, donated kidney does the work that your two kidneys used to do. After your transplant, you will need to take medicines every day to make sure your immune system doesn’t reject the new kidney. Conservative Management Conservative management for kidney failure means that your health care team continues your care without dialysis or a kidney transplant. Treatment goals are to preserve kidney function and quality of life as long as possible and to plan for end-of-life care. Eating Right When you have kidney failure, what you eat and drink can help you maintain a healthy balance of nutrients, salts, and minerals in your body and make your treatments work better. Work with a dietitian to create your eating plan. Related Conditions & Diseases Chronic Kidney Disease Polycystic Kidney Disease Nephrotic Syndrome IgA Nephropathy Clinical Trials The NIDDK and other components of the National Institutes of Health (NIH) support and conduct research into many diseases and conditions. View clinical trials that are currently recruiting volunteers . View More Kidney Disease Information View all Kidney Disease Topics Topics for Health Care Professionals Financial Help for Treatment of Kidney Failure Related Research & Statistics See more about kidney diseases research at NIDDK . Visit the United States Renal Data System . Last Reviewed October 2017   Next: What is Kidney Failure? This content is provided as a service of the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases (NIDDK), part of the National Institutes of Health. NIDDK translates and disseminates research findings to increase knowledge and understanding about health and disease among patients, health professionals, and the public. Content produced by NIDDK is carefully reviewed by NIDDK scientists and other experts. The NIDDK would like to thank: Stephanie Mahooty, DNP, MSN, Renal Medicine Associates; Gayle Romancito, RN, Indian Health Service; Jane Schell, MD, Assistant Professor of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh, Section of Palliative Care and Medical Ethics, Division of Renal-Electrolyte NIH… Turning Discovery Into Health ® Privacy Policy Freedom of Information Act Accessibility Disclaimers Copyright Vulnerability Disclosure Policy Site Map For Staff Only Get Email Updates U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health